Standards Doc	id	relevant	gradeLevel	benchmark	text

NSES	S101EF6F		5-8	Technological solutions have intended benefits and unintended consequences. Some consequences can be predicted, others cannot.	Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understandings about science and technology: Understandings about Science and Technology

Ohio	S1019DAD		6-6	2. Explain how decisions about the use of products and systems can result in desirable or undesirable consequences (e.g., social and environmental).	Science and Technology: Understanding Technology:
	S101E203		8-8	7. Examine the life cycle of a star and predict the next likely stage of a star.	Earth and Space Sciences: The Universe:

New York	S1020D55		5-8	1.2 Make informed consumer decisions by seeking answers to appropriate questions about products, services, and systems; determining the cost/benefit and risk/benefit tradeoffs; and applying this knowledge to a potential purchase	Standard 7: Connections: 1. The knowledge and skills of mathematics, science, and technology are used together to make informed decisions and solve problems, especially those relating to issues of science/technology/society, consumer decision making, design, and inquiry into phenomena.:
	S102748D		5-8	3.3g The periodic table is one useful model for classifying elements. The periodic table can be used to predict properties of elements (metals, nonmetals, noble gases).	Standard 4: The Physical Setting: 3. Matter is made up of particles whose properties determine the observable characteristics of matter and its reactivity.: PERFORMANCE INDICATOR 3.3 develop mental models to explain common chemical reactions and changes in states of matter.:

Minnesota	S10046CA		8-8	1. The student will explain and give examples of how science can be used to make informed ethical decisions by identifying likely consequences of particular actions.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a way of knowing about the world that is characterized by empirical criteria, logical argument and skeptical review.:
	S1015BDA		8-8	4. The student will collect and use data to predict the weather.	III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:

Massachusetts	S1029504		6-8	Design and construct a magnetic levitation vehicle as used in the monorail system. Discuss the vehicle’s benefits and trade-offs. (6.2)	Strand 4: Technology/Engineering: 6. Transportation Technologies: Suggested Learning Activities:

Colorado	S1002160		5-8	As students in grades 5-8 extend their knowledge, what they know and are able to do includes ·comparing and contrasting food webs within and between different ecosystems (for example, grasslands, tundra, marine) and predicting the consequences of disrupting one of the organisms in a food web;	Standard 3: Life Science: Students know and understand the characteristics and structure of living things, the processes of life, and how living things interact with each other and their environment. (Focus: Biology--Anatomy, Physiology, Botany, Zoology, Ecology): 3.2 Students know and understand interrelationships of matter and energy in living systems.:
	S100F487		5-8	As students in grades 5-8 extend their knowledge, what they know and are able to do includes ·using a model to predict change (for example, computer simulation, video sequence, stream table).	Standard 6: Students understand that science involves a particular way of knowing and understand common connections among scientific disciplines.:
	S10126EC		5-8	As students in grades 5-8 extend their knowledge, what they know and are able to do includes ·using examples to demonstrate that scientific ideas are used to explain previous observations and to predict future events (for example, plate tectonics and future earthquake activity);	Standard 1: Students understand the processes of scientific investigation and design, conduct, communicate about, and evaluate such investigations.:
	S1004F00		5-8	As students in grades 5-8 extend their knowledge, what they know and are able to do includes ·identifying, comparing, and predicting variables and conditions related to change (for example, climate, population, motion);	Standard 6: Students understand that science involves a particular way of knowing and understand common connections among scientific disciplines.:
	S100A86D		5-8	As students in grades 5-8 extend their knowledge, what they know and are able to do includes ·identifying and predicting what will change and what will remain unchanged when matter experiences an external force or energy change (for example, boiling a liquid; comparing the force, distance, and work involved in simple machines);	Standard 2: Physical Science: Students know and understand common properties, forms, and changes in matter and energy. (Focus: Physics and Chemistry): 2.3 Students understand that interactions can produce changes in a system, although the total quantities of matter and energy remain unchanged.: