Standard	id	relevance	benchmark	text

NSES	S1004CC9	Inquiry / K-4	"Scientists use different kinds of investigations depending on the questions they are trying to answer.  Types of investigations include describing objects, events, and organisms; classifying them; and doing a fair test (experimenting)."	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understanding about scientific inquiry: Understandings About Scientific Inquiry"

	S1014AED	1	3. The student will know that scientists use different kinds of investigations depending on the questions they are trying to answer.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the nature of scientific investigations.:
	S10242B3		1. The student will ask questions about the natural world that can be investigated scientifically.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the nature of scientific investigations.:
	S10234FF		"2. The student will collect, organize, analyze and present data from a controlled experiment."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will participate in a controlled scientific investigation.:
	S1019D80		1. The student will explore the uses and effects of science in our interaction with the natural world.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand how science is used to investigate interactions between people and the natural world.:
	S10144D9		2. The student will participate in a scientific investigation using appropriate tools.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the nature of scientific investigations.:

NSES	S1011D26	Inquiry / K-4	"Communicate investigations and explanations. Students should begin developing the abilities to communicate, critique, and analyze their work and the work of other students. This communication might be spoken or drawn as well as written."	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understanding about scientific inquiry: Abilities Necessary to Do Scientific Inquiry"

	S100C491		2. The student will recognize that scientific investigations generally work the same way in different places.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a human endeavor practiced throughout the world.:
	S1014AED		3. The student will know that scientists use different kinds of investigations depending on the questions they are trying to answer.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the nature of scientific investigations.:
	S10144D9		2. The student will participate in a scientific investigation using appropriate tools.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the nature of scientific investigations.:
	S100F0C6		1. The student will recognize that repeating a scientific investigation will lead to very similar results.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a human endeavor practiced throughout the world.:
	S10234FF	2	"2. The student will collect, organize, analyze and present data from a controlled experiment."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will participate in a controlled scientific investigation.:

NSES	S1010EF9	Inquiry / 5-8	Technology used to gather data enhances accuracy and allows scientists to analyze and quantify results of investigations.	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understandings about scientific inquiry: Understandings About Scientific Inquiry"

	S1018E57		2. The student will explain why scientists often repeat investigations to be sure of the results.	"I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a way of knowing about the world that is characterized by empirical criteria, logical argument and skeptical review.:"
	S100EE67		"3. The student will use appropriate technology and mathematics skills to access, gather, store, retrieve and organize data."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will use multiple skills to design and conduct scientific investigations.:
	S10135D2		2. The student will describe how scientists can conduct investigations in a simple system and make generalizations to more complex systems.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand that scientific inquiry is used by scientists to investigate the natural world in systematic ways.:
	S1024178		1. The student will relate personal experiences in scientific investigation to the experiences of scientists throughout history.	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"
	S10171D3		"1. The student will give examples of the development of technology influencing scientific knowledge, and investigation and scientific knowledge influencing the development of technology."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will know that science and technology are human efforts that both influence and are influenced by society.:

NSES	S1014165	Inquiry / 5-8	"Different kinds of questions suggest different kinds of scientific investigations. Some investigations involve observing and describing objects, organisms, or events; some involve collecting specimens; some involve experiments; some involve seeking more information; some involve discovery of new objects and phenomena; and some involve making models."	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understandings about scientific inquiry: Understandings About Scientific Inquiry"

	S1003BA7		"1. The student will know that scientific investigations involve the common elements of systematic observations, the careful collection of relevant evidence, logical reasoning and innovation in developing hypotheses and explanations."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand that scientific inquiry is used by scientists to investigate the natural world in systematic ways.:
	S10259E4		1. The student will identify questions that can be answered through scientific investigation and those that cannot.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand that scientific inquiry is used in systematic ways to investigate the natural world.:
	S100B285		"2. The student will identify men and women of various backgrounds and ages who have been involved in science and technology, both past and present."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will recognize that science and technology involve different kinds of work and engages men and women of all backgrounds.:
	S1000994		"2. The student will observe that when a science investigation or experiment is repeated, a similar result is expected."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand the process of scientific investigations.:
	S102473E		1. The student will know that current scientific knowledge and understanding guide scientific investigation.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that communication is essential to science.:

NSES	S10245A5	Inquiry / 9-12	"Results of scientific inquiry--new knowledge and methods--emerge from different types of investigations and public communication among scientists. In communicating and defending the results of scientific inquiry, arguments must be logical and demonstrate connections between natural phenomena, investigations, and the historical body of scientific knowledge. In addition, the methods and procedures that scientists used to obtain evidence must be clearly reported to enhance opportunities for further investigation."	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop  -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understandings about scientific inquiry: Understandings About Scientific Inquiry"

	S1021FFF	1	"3. The student will recognize that in order to be valid, scientific knowledge must meet certain criteria including that it: be consistent with experimental, observational and inferential evidence about nature; follow rules of logic and reporting both methods and procedures; and, be falsifiable and open to criticism."	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the nature of scientific ways of thinking and that scientific knowledge changes and accumulates over time.:
	S100D813		6. The student will give examples of how different domains of science use different bodies of scientific knowledge and employ different methods to investigate questions.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S1015355		"1. The student will design and complete a scientific experiment using scientific methods by determining a testable question, making a hypothesis, designing a scientific investigation with appropriate controls, analyzing data, making conclusions based on evidence and comparing conclusions to the original hypothesis and prior knowledge."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S100431E		5. The student will know that professional scientists and engineers have ethical codes.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S1015F61		"1. The student will relate the structure, complexity and organization of organ systems to the methods of obtaining, transforming, releasing and eliminating the matter and energy used to sustain the organism."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will classify, compare and contrast the diversity of organisms on Earth and their modes of accommodating the requirements for life.:"

NSES	S1015516	Inquiry / 9-12	"Use technology and mathematics to improve investigations and communications. A variety of technologies, such as hand tools, measuring instruments, and calculators, should be an integral component of scientific investigations. The use of computers for the collection, analysis, and display of data is also a part of this standard. Mathematics plays an essential role in all aspects of an inquiry. For example, measurement is used for posing questions, formulas are used for developing explanations, and charts and graphs are used for communicating results."	"Science as Inquiry: Content Standard A:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop  -Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry -Understandings about scientific inquiry: Abilities Necessary to Do Scientific Inquiry"

	S101C56E	1	3. The student will apply mathematics and models to analyze data and support conclusions.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S1015355		"1. The student will design and complete a scientific experiment using scientific methods by determining a testable question, making a hypothesis, designing a scientific investigation with appropriate controls, analyzing data, making conclusions based on evidence and comparing conclusions to the original hypothesis and prior knowledge."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S100DCD5		3. The student will provide an example of how technology facilitates new discoveries and the development of scientific knowledge.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S10164C4		"1. The student will compare and contrast the purposes and career opportunities of engineering, technology and science."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S1013CFB		2. The student will provide an example of a need or problem identified by science and solved by engineering or technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:

NSES	S101AD47	Subject / K-4	"The sun, moon, stars, clouds, birds, and airplanes all have properties, locations, and movements that can be observed and described."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades K-4, all students should develop an understanding of -Properties of earth materials -Objects in the sky -Changes in earth and sky: Objects in the Sky"

	S10020E4	1	1. The student will observe and describe the changes in the position of the sun and the moon.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: Student will recognize the changes that occur in the sky in a 24-hour day.:
	S1026758	1	1. The student will recognize that the stars in the sky appear to slowly move from east to west.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will identify the patterns and movements of celestial objects.:
	S1009C88		2. The student will identify the sun as an average -sized star and that the other stars are so far away that they look like points of light.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will identify the patterns and movements of celestial objects.:
	S1020959		3. The student will observe that the sun supplies heat and light to the Earth.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will understand the characteristics and relationships of objects in the solar system.:
	S1022A53	3	"4. The student will know that planets look like stars, but over time they move differently than stars."	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will understand the characteristics and relationships of objects in the solar system.:

NSES	S101079B	Subject / K-4	"Plants and animals have life cycles that include being born, developing into adults, reproducing, and eventually dying. The details of this life cycle are different for different organisms."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop understanding of -The characteristics of organisms -Life cycles of organisms -Organisms and environments: Life Cycles of Organisms"

	S1020861	1	1. The student will describe life cycles of plants and animals.	IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will recognize that plants and animals have life cycles.:
	S101F899		"1. The student will describe the structures that serve different functions in growth, survival and reproduction for plants and animals."	IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will recognize that plants and animals have different structures that serve various functions.:
	S1015F92		2. The student will match adult animals and plants to their offspring.	IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will understand that there is variation among individuals of one kind within a population.:
	S100D63D	1	1. The student will observe and describe how plants and animals grow and change.	IV. Life Science: B. Organisms: The student will observe plant and animal life cycles.:
	S100EE0E		1. The student will classify plants and animals according to their physical characteristics.	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will know that living things can be sorted into groups in many ways according to their varied characteristics, structures and behaviors.:"

NSES	S1023464	Subject / K-4	"Organisms have basic needs. For example, animals need air, water, and food; plants require air, water, nutrients, and light. Organisms can survive only in environments in which their needs can be met. The world has many different environments, and distinct environments support the life of different types of organisms."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop understanding of -The characteristics of organisms -Life cycles of organisms -Organisms and environments: The Characteristics of Organisms"

	S100386F	1	"1. The student will know that animals need air, water and food and that plants require air, water, nutrients and light."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will understand that organisms have basic needs.:
	S102509F	1	"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:
	S10032E9	1	1. The student will observe and describe some features of plants and animals that allow them to live in specific environments.	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that organisms live in different environments.:
	S1000DD6		"2. The student will recognize that cells need: food, water and air, a way to dispose of waste, and an environment in which they can live."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will know that all organisms are composed of cells, which are the fundamental units of life.:"
	S100810F		"1. The student will observe and describe rocks, soils, water and air."	III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will recognize basic Earth materials.:

NSES	S1008E99	Subject / K-4	"Weather changes from day to day and over the seasons. Weather can be described by measurable quantities, such as temperature, wind direction and speed, and precipitation."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades K-4, all students should develop an understanding of -Properties of earth materials -Objects in the sky -Changes in earth and sky: Changes in the Earth and Sky"

	S10001F0	1	1. The student will describe daily and seasonal changes in weather.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will observe weather changes.:"
	S101AC15	1	"1. The student will observe, record and describe characteristics in daily weather and seasonal cycles."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate weather cycles.:"
	S10188D7		"1. The student will recognize the difference between rotation and revolution and their connection to day, night, seasons and the year."	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will understand the characteristics and relationships of objects in the solar system.:
	S1012D2A		"1. The student will describe the water cycle involving the processes of evaporation, condensation, precipitation and collection."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will recognize that water on Earth cycles and exists in many forms.:"
	S1020A62		"1. The student will observe and describe how objects move in a variety of ways, including, but not limited to, a straight line, a curve, a circle, back and forth and at different speeds."	II. Physical Science: D. Motion: The student will know that objects move in various ways.:

NSES	S1011F03	Subject / K-4	"Earth materials are solid rocks and soils, water, and the gases of the atmosphere. The varied materials have different physical and chemical properties, which make them useful in different ways, for example, as building materials, as sources of fuel, or for growing the plants we use as food. Earth materials provide many of the resources that humans use."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades K-4, all students should develop an understanding of -Properties of earth materials -Objects in the sky -Changes in earth and sky: Properties of Earth Materials"

	S100810F	1	"1. The student will observe and describe rocks, soils, water and air."	III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will recognize basic Earth materials.:
	S100386F		"1. The student will know that animals need air, water and food and that plants require air, water, nutrients and light."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will understand that organisms have basic needs.:
	S100138B		1. The student will know that organisms interact with one another in various ways besides providing food.	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that an organism‚Äôs patterns of behavior are related to the nature of its environment.:
	S1000DD6		"2. The student will recognize that cells need: food, water and air, a way to dispose of waste, and an environment in which they can live."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will know that all organisms are composed of cells, which are the fundamental units of life.:"
	S102509F		"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:

NSES	S10180F9	Subject / 5-8	"Some changes in the solid earth can be described as the ""rock cycle."" Old rocks at the earth's surface weather, forming sediments that are buried, then compacted, heated, and often recrystallized into new rock. Eventually, those new rocks may be brought to the surface by the forces that drive plate motions, and the rock cycle continues."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of the earth system -Earth's history -Earth in the solar system: Structure of the Earth System"

	S10178EE	1	3. The student will describe the various processes and interactions of the rock cycle.	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will identify Earth‚Äôs composition, structure and processes.:"
	S100CF1E	1	"2. The student will describe how features on the Earth‚Äôs surface are created and constantly changing through a combination of slow and rapid processes of weathering, erosion, sediment deposition, landslides, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes."	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will identify Earth‚Äôs composition, structure and processes.:"
	S100CB3E		1. The student will recognize the natural processes that cause rocks to break down into smaller pieces and eventually into soil.	III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will explore the structures and functions of Earth systems.:
	S10060D7		"2. The student will demonstrate that the greater the force applied, the greater the change in motion."	II. Physical Science: D. Motion: The student will understand that changes in speed or direction of motion are caused by forces.:
	S101FF38		2. The student will identify the forces that create currents and layers in the Earth‚Äôs atmosphere and water systems.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"

NSES	S100A55F	Subject / 5-8	"Millions of species of animals, plants, and microorganisms are alive today. Although different species might look dissimilar, the unity among organisms becomes apparent from an analysis of internal structures, the similarity of their chemical processes, and the evidence of common ancestry."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Structure and function in living systems -Reproduction and heredity -Regulation and behavior -Populations and ecosystems -Diversity and adaptations of organisms: Diversity and Adaptations of Organisms"

	S10002DD	2	4. The student will recognize that scientific evidence can be used to infer common ancestry among some organisms.	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.:"
	S100C5E1		3. The student will distinguish between plant and animal cells.	IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will understand that all organisms are composed of cells that carry on the many functions needed to sustain life.:
	S1007C81		"1. The student will recognize that organisms need energy to stay alive and grow, and that this energy originates from the sun."	"IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will know that matter and energy flow into, out of, and within a biological system.:"
	S100E037		5. The student will comprehend that reproduction is essential for the continuation of a species.	IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will understand that heredity information is contained in genes which are inherited through both sexual and asexual reproduction.:
	S1003E1F		2. The student will recognize that extinction of a species occurs when the environment changes and the adaptive characteristics of a species are insufficient to allow its survival.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:

NSES	S101F737	Subject / 5-8	"All organisms must be able to obtain and use resources, grow, reproduce, and maintain stable internal conditions while living in a constantly changing external environment."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Structure and function in living systems -Reproduction and heredity -Regulation and behavior -Populations and ecosystems -Diversity and adaptations of organisms: Regulation and Behavior"

	S100EB6B	1	"2. The student will recognize that an organism‚Äôs body plan and its ability to regulate its internal environment enable it to make or find food, grow and reproduce in a constantly changing environment."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will understand that living systems, at every level of organization, demonstrate the complementary nature of structure and function.:"
	S101A2EA		"3. The student will recognize that organisms are growing, dying and decaying, and that their matter is recycled."	"IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will know that matter and energy flow into, out of, and within a biological system.:"
	S1007C81		"1. The student will recognize that organisms need energy to stay alive and grow, and that this energy originates from the sun."	"IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will know that matter and energy flow into, out of, and within a biological system.:"
	S100A0B6		"4. The student will explain the factors that affect the number and types of organisms an ecosystem can support, including available resources, abiotic and biotic factors and disease."	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"
	S10002DD		4. The student will recognize that scientific evidence can be used to infer common ancestry among some organisms.	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.:"

NSES	S100E78A	Subject / 5-8	"Most objects in the solar system are in regular and predictable motion. Those motions explain such phenomena as the day, the year, phases of the moon, and eclipses."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of the earth system -Earth's history -Earth in the solar system: Earth in the Solar System"

	S1011545	1	"4. The student will use the predictability of the motions of the Earth, and sun to explain the length of day, length of year, phases of the moon, eclipses, tides and shadows."	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will compare objects in the solar system and explain their interactions with the Earth.:
	S1024ABE		"3. The student will compare and contrast the planets, taking into account their composition, mass and distance from the sun and recognize the conditions that have allowed life to flourish on Earth."	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will compare objects in the solar system and explain their interactions with the Earth.:
	S1025B48		1. The student will recognize that the sun is the principal energy source for the solar system and that this energy is transferred in the form of radiation.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will compare objects in the solar system and explain their interactions with the Earth.:
	S10060D7		"2. The student will demonstrate that the greater the force applied, the greater the change in motion."	II. Physical Science: D. Motion: The student will understand that changes in speed or direction of motion are caused by forces.:
	S10233CA		2. The student will recognize that the sun is a medium-sized star and is the closest star to Earth. It is the central and largest body in the solar system and is one of billions of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will describe the composition and structure of the universe.:

NSES	S10070A0	Subject / 5-8	"Energy is a property of many substances and is associated with heat, light, electricity, mechanical motion, sound, nuclei, and the nature of a chemical. Energy is transferred in many ways."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop an understanding of -Properties and changes of properties in matter -Motions and forces -Transfer of energy: Transfer of Energy"

	S1020B99	1	"1. The student will compare and contrast heat, chemical, mechanical and electrical energy and identify transformations of energy from one form to another in everyday situations."	II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand that matter is made of small particles and this explains the properties of matter.:
	S10040AC		4. The student will recognize the relationship between light and heat.	II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand that matter is made of small particles and this explains the properties of matter.:
	S10157D8		1. The student will know that plants use the energy in light to make sugars out of carbon dioxide and water.	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will understand how the flow of energy and the recycling of matter contribute to a stable ecosystem.:
	S1013A63		2. The student will explain how energy is transferred through food chains and food webs in an ecosystem.	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will understand how the flow of energy and the recycling of matter contribute to a stable ecosystem.:
	S1025B48		1. The student will recognize that the sun is the principal energy source for the solar system and that this energy is transferred in the form of radiation.	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will compare objects in the solar system and explain their interactions with the Earth.:

NSES	S101427D	Subject / 5-8	A population consists of all individuals of a species that occur together at a given place and time. All populations living together and the physical factors with which they interact compose an ecosystem.	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Structure and function in living systems -Reproduction and heredity -Regulation and behavior -Populations and ecosystems -Diversity and adaptations of organisms: Populations and Ecosystems"

	S1003558	1	3. The student will define an ecosystem as all populations living together and the physical factors with which they interact.	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"
	S102515B	1	2. The student will define a population as all individuals of a species that exist together at a given place and time.	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"
	S1014844		1. The student will recognize that individuals of the same species differ in their characteristics and that sometimes the differences give individuals an advantage in surviving and reproducing.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:
	S100A7F7		6. The student will describe climate changes that have occurred over time.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"
	S1003E1F		2. The student will recognize that extinction of a species occurs when the environment changes and the adaptive characteristics of a species are insufficient to allow its survival.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:

NSES	S10134F3	Subject / 5-8	"Biological evolution accounts for the diversity of species developed through gradual processes over many generations. Species acquire many of their unique characteristics through biological adaptation, which involves the selection of naturally occurring variations in populations. Biological adaptations include changes in structures, behaviors, or physiology that enhance survival and reproductive success in a particular environment."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Structure and function in living systems -Reproduction and heredity -Regulation and behavior -Populations and ecosystems -Diversity and adaptations of organisms: Diversity and Adaptations of Organisms"

	S100E08C	1	"3. The student will explain how biological adaptations in structure, function and behavior enhance the reproductive success and survival of a species in a particular environment."	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.:"
	S1004789	1	5. The student will explain how diversity of species develops through gradual processes over generations.	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.:"
	S1014844	1	1. The student will recognize that individuals of the same species differ in their characteristics and that sometimes the differences give individuals an advantage in surviving and reproducing.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:
	S1003E1F	3	2. The student will recognize that extinction of a species occurs when the environment changes and the adaptive characteristics of a species are insufficient to allow its survival.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:
	S102515B		2. The student will define a population as all individuals of a species that exist together at a given place and time.	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"

NSES	S100A83D	Subject / 5-8	"Clouds, formed by the condensation of water vapor, affect weather and climate."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of the earth system -Earth's history -Earth in the solar system: Structure of the Earth System"

	S1022E66		5. The student will identify the composition and structures of the atmosphere.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"
	S102314E		"5. The student will explore the interaction of the lithosphere, atmosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere and space."	III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will explore the structures and functions of Earth systems.:
	S1019475		"1. The student will define radiation, conduction and convection and explain their effects on weather and climate."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"
	S1015BDA		4. The student will collect and use data to predict the weather.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"
	S100A7F7		6. The student will describe climate changes that have occurred over time.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"

NSES	S101AB56	Subject / 9-12	"Interactions among the solid earth, the oceans, the atmosphere, and organisms have resulted in the ongoing evolution of the earth system. We can observe some changes such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions on a human time scale, but many processes such as mountain building and plate movements take place over hundreds of millions of years."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Energy in the earth system -Geochemical cycles -Origin and evolution of the earth system -Origin and evolution of the universe: The Origin and Evolution of the Earth System"

	S101A20C	1	"4. The student will use the theory of plate tectonics to analyze relationships among earthquakes, volcanoes, mountains fossil deposits, rock layers and ocean features."	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"
	S1005C9A		"4. The student will predict and analyze how a change in an ecosystem, resulting from natural causes, changes in climate, human activity or introduction of invasive species, can affect both the number of organisms in a population and the biodiversity of species in the ecosystem."	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will describe how the environment and interactions between organisms can affect the number of species and the diversity of species in an ecosystem.:
	S1000B1F		1. The student will understand that species change over time and the term biological evolution is used to describe this process.	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.:"
	S10187FE		"2. The student will trace the cyclical movement of carbon and water through the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and biosphere."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will explain the causes and effects of the Earth‚Äôs atmospheric and hydrologic processes.:"
	S1017A37		2. The student will apply the laws of thermodynamics to explain the cycling of materials and transfer of energy in the Earth system.	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"

NSES	S101FB5D	Subject / 9-12	"Global climate is determined by energy transfer from the sun at and near the earth's surface. This energy transfer is influenced by dynamic processes such as cloud cover and the earth's rotation, and static conditions such as the position of mountain ranges and oceans."	"Earth and Space Science: Content Standard D:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Energy in the earth system -Geochemical cycles -Origin and evolution of the earth system -Origin and evolution of the universe: Energy in the Earth System"

	S10158A5		"1. The student will explain how the sun, Earth and solar system formed."	III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will relate the formation and components of our solar system to the conditions necessary for life.:
	S100C80A		"3. The student will demonstrate the effect of the Earth‚Äôs tilt, rotation and revolution on the seasons, day length and tides."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will explain the causes and effects of the Earth‚Äôs atmospheric and hydrologic processes.:"
	S1024239	1	"1. The student will explain how the transfer of energy and motions of the Earth contribute to global climatic processes including wind, waves and ocean currents."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will explain the causes and effects of the Earth‚Äôs atmospheric and hydrologic processes.:"
	S1017A37		2. The student will apply the laws of thermodynamics to explain the cycling of materials and transfer of energy in the Earth system.	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"
	S1014BCF		1. The student will identify the internal and external sources of energy for the Earth.	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"

NSES	S100A6A3	Subject / 9-12	"As matter and energy flow through different levels of organization of living systems--cells, organs, organisms, communities--and between living systems and the physical environment, chemical elements are recombined in different ways. Each recombination results in storage and dissipation of energy into the environment as heat. Matter and energy are conserved in each change."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -The cell -Molecular basis of heredity -Biological evolution -Interdependence of organisms -Matter, energy, and organization in living systems -Behavior of organisms: Matter, Energy, and Organization in Living Systems"

	S1020B39	1	"5. The student will understand that matter and energy flow through different levels of organization of living systems, from cells to communities, as well as between living systems and the physical environment as chemical elements are recombined in different ways. Each recombination results in both storage and dissipation of energy."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:
	S1015F61		"1. The student will relate the structure, complexity and organization of organ systems to the methods of obtaining, transforming, releasing and eliminating the matter and energy used to sustain the organism."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will classify, compare and contrast the diversity of organisms on Earth and their modes of accommodating the requirements for life.:"
	S100702E		"2. The student will know that all matter tends to become more disorganized over time, and that living systems require a continuous input of energy in order to maintain their chemical and physical organizations and prevent death."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:
	S1007931		1. The student will describe the factors related to matter and energy in an ecosystem that both influence fluctuations in population size and determine the carrying capacity of a population.	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will describe how the environment and interactions between organisms can affect the number of species and the diversity of species in an ecosystem.:
	S10006EE		"5. The student will differentiate between the processes of photosynthesis and respiration in terms of energy flow, reactants and products."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"

NSES	S101E8FC	Subject / 9-12	"The nuclear forces that hold the nucleus of an atom together, at nuclear distances, are usually stronger than the electric forces that would make it fly apart. Nuclear reactions convert a fraction of the mass of interacting particles into energy, and they can release much greater amounts of energy than atomic interactions. Fission is the splitting of a large nucleus into smaller pieces. Fusion is the joining of two nuclei at extremely high temperature and pressure, and is the process responsible for the energy of the sun and other stars."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Structure of Atoms"

	S100A6B3	1	6. The student will compare and contrast the amount of energy released through chemical reactions and nuclear fission and fusion.	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S10174D6		"9. The student will describe energy, work and power both conceptually and quantitatively."	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S10006EE		"5. The student will differentiate between the processes of photosynthesis and respiration in terms of energy flow, reactants and products."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S1015F61		"1. The student will relate the structure, complexity and organization of organ systems to the methods of obtaining, transforming, releasing and eliminating the matter and energy used to sustain the organism."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will classify, compare and contrast the diversity of organisms on Earth and their modes of accommodating the requirements for life.:"
	S1014BCF		1. The student will identify the internal and external sources of energy for the Earth.	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"

NSES	S102512C	Subject / 9-12	"Like other aspects of an organism's biology, behaviors have evolved through natural selection. Behaviors often have an adaptive logic when viewed in terms of evolutionary principles."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -The cell -Molecular basis of heredity -Biological evolution -Interdependence of organisms -Matter, energy, and organization in living systems -Behavior of organisms: The Behavior of Organisms"

	S10210AC		7. The student will compare and contrast the states of matter in terms of interactions between particles.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S10006EE		"5. The student will differentiate between the processes of photosynthesis and respiration in terms of energy flow, reactants and products."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S1023266		5. The student will be able to describe physical and chemical changes in terms of the law of conservation of energy.	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S10136DF		1. The student will explain that the instructions for the characteristics of all organisms are carried in nucleic acids.	IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will explain how inherited characteristics are encoded by genes.:
	S1022727		"1. The student will explain the relationship between abiotic and biotic components of an ecosystem in terms of the cycling of water, carbon, oxygen and nitrogen."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:

NSES	S101A343	Subject / 9-12	"Heat consists of random motion and the vibrations of atoms, molecules, and ions. The higher the temperature, the greater the atomic or molecular motion."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Conservation of Energy and the Increase in Disorder"

	S100D216		5. The student will explain how neutral atoms become ions.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1012477		8. The student will differentiate between an atom and a molecule.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1009AAF		4. The student will explain how the rearrangement of atoms and molecules in a chemical reaction illustrates conservation of mass.	II. Physical Science: B. Chemical Reactions: The student will describe chemical reactions and the factors that influence them.:
	S100F363		6. The student will be able to explain how atoms form compounds through bonding.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S102326F		4. The student will explain that respiration releases chemical energy through the breakdown of molecules.	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:

NSES	S1014F5C	Subject / 9-12	"Chemical reactions can take place in time periods ranging from the few femtoseconds (10-15 seconds) required for an atom to move a fraction of a chemical bond distance to geologic time scales of billions of years. Reaction rates depend on how often the reacting atoms and molecules encounter one another, on the temperature, and on the properties--including shape--of the reacting species."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Chemical Reactions"

	S1012477		8. The student will differentiate between an atom and a molecule.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1009AAF		4. The student will explain how the rearrangement of atoms and molecules in a chemical reaction illustrates conservation of mass.	II. Physical Science: B. Chemical Reactions: The student will describe chemical reactions and the factors that influence them.:
	S1016433	1	"2. The student will explain the influence of temperature, surface area, agitation and catalysts on the rate of a reaction."	II. Physical Science: B. Chemical Reactions: The student will describe chemical reactions and the factors that influence them.:
	S100F363		6. The student will be able to explain how atoms form compounds through bonding.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S102326F		4. The student will explain that respiration releases chemical energy through the breakdown of molecules.	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:

NSES	S1003918	Subject / 9-12	"Objects change their motion only when a net force is applied. Laws of motion are used to calculate precisely the effects of forces on the motion of objects. The magnitude of the change in motion can be calculated using the relationship F = ma, which is independent of the nature of the force. Whenever one object exerts force on another, a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction is exerted on the first object."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Motions and Forces"

	S101174E		2. The student will identify the dominant force or forces in a variety of interactions.	II. Physical Science: E. Forces of Nature: The student will understand the forces of nature and their application.:
	S101EF8E		"1. The student will recognize the factors that affect the presence and magnitude of gravitational, electromagnetic, weak and strong nuclear forces."	II. Physical Science: E. Forces of Nature: The student will understand the forces of nature and their application.:
	S1014CE3		2. The student will describe the effect of friction and gravity on the motion of an object.	II. Physical Science: D. Motion: The student will understand the nature of force and motion.:
	S101C879		"1. The student will know that potential energy is stored energy and is associated with gravitational or electrical force, mechanical position or chemical composition."	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S1024239		"1. The student will explain how the transfer of energy and motions of the Earth contribute to global climatic processes including wind, waves and ocean currents."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will explain the causes and effects of the Earth‚Äôs atmospheric and hydrologic processes.:"

NSES	S1009600	Subject / 9-12	"The atom's nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons, which are much more massive than electrons. When an element has atoms that differ in the number of neutrons, these atoms are called different isotopes of the element."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Structure of Atoms"

	S101C214		"1. The student will identify protons, neutrons and electrons as the major components of the atom, their mass relative to one another, their arrangement and their charge."	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1018997		"3. The student will compare and contrast the properties of an element and its isotopes, and describe how isotopes can be used in research, medicine and industry."	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1012477		8. The student will differentiate between an atom and a molecule.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S100F363		6. The student will be able to explain how atoms form compounds through bonding.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S100D216		5. The student will explain how neutral atoms become ions.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"

NSES	S100C3D6	Subject / 9-12	"An element is composed of a single type of atom. When elements are listed in order according to the number of protons (called the atomic number), repeating patterns of physical and chemical properties identify families of elements with similar properties. This ""Periodic Table"" is a consequence of the repeating pattern of outermost electrons and their permitted energies."	"Physical Science: Content Standard B:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop an understanding of -Structure of atoms -Structure and properties of matter -Chemical reactions -Motions and forces -Conservation of energy and increase in disorder -Interactions of energy and matter: Structure and Properties of Matter"

	S1021DE7		"4. The student will use the periodic table to identify regions, families, groups and periods."	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S10218EB	1	2. The student will be able to explain the relationship of an element‚Äôs position on the periodic table to its atomic number and atomic mass.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S101BB46		9. The student will differentiate between an element and compound.	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"
	S1002E44		2. The student will explain how nuclear fusion produces energy and other elements.	"III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will use astronomical data to reveal the structure, scale, and changes in the stars, galaxies and universe over time.:"
	S1018997		"3. The student will compare and contrast the properties of an element and its isotopes, and describe how isotopes can be used in research, medicine and industry."	"II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand the nature of matter including its forms, properties and interactions.:"

NSES	S1008B2A	Subject / 9-12	"Energy flows through ecosystems in one direction, from photosynthetic organisms to herbivores to carnivores and decomposers."	"Life Science: Content Standard C:As a result of their activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -The cell -Molecular basis of heredity -Biological evolution -Interdependence of organisms -Matter, energy, and organization in living systems -Behavior of organisms: The Interdependence of Organisms"

	S1020B39	2	"5. The student will understand that matter and energy flow through different levels of organization of living systems, from cells to communities, as well as between living systems and the physical environment as chemical elements are recombined in different ways. Each recombination results in both storage and dissipation of energy."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:
	S1023CAF		3. The student will explain that sunlight is transformed into chemical energy by photosynthetic organisms.	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:
	S10006EE		"5. The student will differentiate between the processes of photosynthesis and respiration in terms of energy flow, reactants and products."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S1016E87		4. The student will explain how Doppler evidence indicates our universe is expanding in all directions.	"III. Earth and Space Science: C. The Universe: The student will use astronomical data to reveal the structure, scale, and changes in the stars, galaxies and universe over time.:"
	S100B7B6		2. The student will explain how adaptations of species and co-evolution with other species are related to success in an ecosystem.	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will describe how the environment and interactions between organisms can affect the number of species and the diversity of species in an ecosystem.:

NSES	S100386E	Applied / K-4	"People continue inventing new ways of doing things, solving problems, and getting work done. New ideas and inventions often affect other people; sometimes the effects are good and sometimes they are bad. It is helpful to try to determine in advance how ideas and inventions will affect other people."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop understanding of -Personal health -Characteristics and changes in populations -Types of resources -Changes in environments -Science and technology in local challenges: Science and Technology in Local Challenges"

	S101957C		4. The student will recognize that everyone can do science and invent things and ideas.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a human endeavor practiced throughout the world.:
	S102509F		"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:
	S1007139		3. The student will give examples of scientific advances throughout history.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a human endeavor practiced throughout the world.:
	S1019D80		1. The student will explore the uses and effects of science in our interaction with the natural world.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand how science is used to investigate interactions between people and the natural world.:
	S10210F4		2. The student will know simple ways that living things can be grouped.	IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will understand that there are living and nonliving things.:

NSES	S1014192	Applied / K-4	"Identify a simple problem. In problem identification, children should develop the ability to explain a problem in their own words and identify a specific task and solution related to the problem."	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understanding about science and technology -Abilities to distinguish between natural objects and objects made by humans: Abilities of Technological Design"

	S1024F3C		1. The student will identify and investigate environmental issues and potential solutions.	III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will investigate the impact humans have on the environment.:
	S10016A3		2. The student will identify where water exists on Earth.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will recognize that water on Earth cycles and exists in many forms.:"
	S1001FBD		"2. The student will identify cumulus, cirrus and stratus clouds."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate weather conditions.:"
	S1007BB3		3. The student will identify objects and materials that conduct electricity and those that are insulators.	II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand basic electricity and its application in everyday life.:
	S1012EE4		2. The student will identify similarities and differences between parent and offspring.	"IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will understand that many characteristics of an organism are inherited from its parents, but that other characteristics result from an individual‚Äôs interactions with the environment.:"

NSES	S10085B0	Applied / K-4	"Environments are the space, conditions, and factors that affect an individual's and a population's ability to survive and their quality of life."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop understanding of -Personal health -Characteristics and changes in populations -Types of resources -Changes in environments -Science and technology in local challenges: Changes in Environments"

	S101D94D		1. The student will recognize when comparisons might not be fair because some conditions are not kept the same.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will participate in a controlled scientific investigation.:
	S100D9E8		1. The student will observe and describe the environment using the five senses.	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will understand that people have five senses that can be used to learn about the environment.:
	S1013EC1		1. The student will explore the use of science as a tool that can help investigate and answer questions about the environment.	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the use of science as a tool to examine the natural world.:
	S1000DD6		"2. The student will recognize that cells need: food, water and air, a way to dispose of waste, and an environment in which they can live."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will know that all organisms are composed of cells, which are the fundamental units of life.:"
	S102509F		"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:

NSES	S1005DA5	Applied / K-4	Some objects occur in nature; others have been designed and made by people to solve human problems and enhance the quality of life.	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understanding about science and technology -Abilities to distinguish between natural objects and objects made by humans: Abilities to Distinguish Between Natural Objects and Objects Made by Humans"

	S102509F		"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:

NSES	S100CE4A	Applied / K-4	"Nutrition is essential to health.  Students should understand how the body uses food and how various foods contribute to health. Recommendations for good nutrition include eating a variety of foods, eating less sugar, and eating less fat."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades K-4, all students should develop understanding of -Personal health -Characteristics and changes in populations -Types of resources -Changes in environments -Science and technology in local challenges: Personal Health"

	S101372C		"1. The student will observe and describe major parts of the body including, but not limited to, eyes, nose, heart, skin, arms, legs and muscles."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will know that the human body is made up of parts.:
	S1026749		"2. The student will know that germs entering the body can cause disease, and that the body has defenses against these germs."	"IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will know the structures that serve various functions in the human body, including protection from disease.:"
	S1000DD6		"2. The student will recognize that cells need: food, water and air, a way to dispose of waste, and an environment in which they can live."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will know that all organisms are composed of cells, which are the fundamental units of life.:"
	S100138B		1. The student will know that organisms interact with one another in various ways besides providing food.	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that an organism‚Äôs patterns of behavior are related to the nature of its environment.:
	S102509F		"1. The student will know that people need water, food, air, waste removal and a particular range of temperature in their environment, just like other animals."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will recognize that people have basic needs.:

NSES	S10177AE	Applied / 5-8	"When an area becomes overpopulated, the environment will become degraded due to the increased use of resources."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Personal health -Populations, resources, and environments -Natural hazards -Risks and benefits -Science and technology in society: Populations, Resources, and Environments"

	S100A0B6		"4. The student will explain the factors that affect the number and types of organisms an ecosystem can support, including available resources, abiotic and biotic factors and disease."	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"
	S100E6A6		"2. The student will identify risks associated with natural, chemical and biological hazards."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will understand human body systems and their relationship to disease.:
	S10232CE		1. The student will provide examples of the potentially irreversible effects of human activity on ecosystems.	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"
	S10007D1		4. The student will comprehend that interactions with the environment affect some inherited traits.	IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will understand that heredity information is contained in genes which are inherited through both sexual and asexual reproduction.:
	S100EB6B		"2. The student will recognize that an organism‚Äôs body plan and its ability to regulate its internal environment enable it to make or find food, grow and reproduce in a constantly changing environment."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will understand that living systems, at every level of organization, demonstrate the complementary nature of structure and function.:"

NSES	S1001C0F	Applied / 5-8	"Implement a proposed design. Students should organize materials and other resources, plan their work, make good use of group collaboration where appropriate, choose suitable tools and techniques, and work with appropriate measurement methods to ensure adequate accuracy."	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop -: Abilities of Technological Design"

	S1003625		1. The student will describe different kinds of work done in science and technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will recognize that science and technology involve different kinds of work and engages men and women of all backgrounds.:
	S100C638		"2. The student will explain why scientists may work in teams or work alone, can collaborate and, at times, compete."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will know that science and technology are human efforts that both influence and are influenced by society.:
	S100EF9F		2. The student will use sufficient trials and adequate sample size to ensure reliable data.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will use multiple skills to design and conduct scientific investigations.:
	S100EB6B		"2. The student will recognize that an organism‚Äôs body plan and its ability to regulate its internal environment enable it to make or find food, grow and reproduce in a constantly changing environment."	"IV. Life Science: B. Diversity of Organisms: The student will understand that living systems, at every level of organization, demonstrate the complementary nature of structure and function.:"
	S10037B0		6. The student will recognize that vibrations such as sound and earthquakes move in waves and that waves move at different speeds in different materials.	II. Physical Science: A. Structure of Matter: The student will understand that matter is made of small particles and this explains the properties of matter.:

NSES	S101BAAD	Applied / 5-8	"Many individuals have contributed to the traditions of science. Studying some of these individuals provides further understanding of scientific inquiry, science as a human endeavor, the nature of science, and the relationships between science and society."	"History and Nature of Science: Content Standard G:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -: History of Science"

	S1004622	1	1. The student will cite examples of individuals throughout history who made discoveries and contributions in science and technology.	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"
	S100B285	1	"2. The student will identify men and women of various backgrounds and ages who have been involved in science and technology, both past and present."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will recognize that science and technology involve different kinds of work and engages men and women of all backgrounds.:
	S1024178		1. The student will relate personal experiences in scientific investigation to the experiences of scientists throughout history.	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"
	S1003625		1. The student will describe different kinds of work done in science and technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will recognize that science and technology involve different kinds of work and engages men and women of all backgrounds.:
	S101351E		"2. The student will cite examples of how science and technology contributed to changes in agriculture, manufacturing, sanitation, medicine, warfare, transportation, information processing or communication."	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"

NSES	S1015BE9	Applied / 5-8	Individuals can use a systematic approach to thinking critically about risks and benefits. Examples include applying probability estimates to risks and comparing them to estimated personal and social benefits.	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of -Personal health -Populations, resources, and environments -Natural hazards -Risks and benefits -Science and technology in society: Risks and Benefits"

	S100E6A6		"2. The student will identify risks associated with natural, chemical and biological hazards."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will understand human body systems and their relationship to disease.:
	S100BD0A		1. The student will distinguish between scientific evidence and personal opinion.	"I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a way of knowing about the world that is characterized by empirical criteria, logical argument and skeptical review.:"
	S1024178		1. The student will relate personal experiences in scientific investigation to the experiences of scientists throughout history.	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"
	S1025DC7		6. The student will compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of sexual and asexual reproduction.	IV. Life Science: D. Heredity: The student will understand that heredity information is contained in genes which are inherited through both sexual and asexual reproduction.:
	S1025FEC		3. The student will compare the structure of fossils to one another and to living organisms.	IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will know that biological populations change over time.:

NSES	S101EF6F	Applied / 5-8	"Technological solutions have intended benefits and unintended consequences. Some consequences can be predicted, others cannot."	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop  Understandings about Science and Technology"

	S10046CA		1. The student will explain and give examples of how science can be used to make informed ethical decisions by identifying likely consequences of particular actions.	"I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a way of knowing about the world that is characterized by empirical criteria, logical argument and skeptical review.:"
	S1015BDA		4. The student will collect and use data to predict the weather.	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will investigate how the atmosphere interacts with the Earth system.:"

NSES	S101E391	Applied / 5-8	Important personal and social decisions are made based on perceptions of benefits and risks.	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of  Risks and Benefits"

	S100E6A6		"2. The student will identify risks associated with natural, chemical and biological hazards."	IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will understand human body systems and their relationship to disease.:
	S100BD0A		1. The student will distinguish between scientific evidence and personal opinion.	"I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand that science is a way of knowing about the world that is characterized by empirical criteria, logical argument and skeptical review.:"
	S1024178		1. The student will relate personal experiences in scientific investigation to the experiences of scientists throughout history.	"I. History and Nature of Science: D. Historic Perspectives: The student will understand how scientific discovery, culture, societal norms and technology have influenced one another in different time periods.:"
	S101C160		1. The student will formulate a testable hypothesis based on prior knowledge.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct scientific investigations.:

NSES	S100F403	Applied / 5-8	"Scientists and engineers work in many different settings, including colleges and universities, businesses and industries, specific research institutes, and government agencies."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 5-8, all students should develop understanding of Science and Technology in Society"

	S1003625	2	1. The student will describe different kinds of work done in science and technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will recognize that science and technology involve different kinds of work and engages men and women of all backgrounds.:
	S100C638		"2. The student will explain why scientists may work in teams or work alone, can collaborate and, at times, compete."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will know that science and technology are human efforts that both influence and are influenced by society.:
	S10113FC		"6. The student will classify and identify rocks and minerals using characteristics including but not limited to density, hardness and streak."	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will identify Earthâ€™s composition, structure and processes.:"
	S1017A9A		"4. The student will present and explain data and findings from controlled experiments using multiple representations including tables, graphs, physical models and demonstrations."	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will understand that scientific inquiry is used in systematic ways to investigate the natural world.:
	S100A0B6		"4. The student will explain the factors that affect the number and types of organisms an ecosystem can support, including available resources, abiotic and biotic factors and disease."	"IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will understand that within ecosystems, complex interactions exist between organisms and the physical environment.:"

NSES	S10039B5	Applied / 9-12	"Creativity, imagination, and a good knowledge base are all required in the work of science and engineering."	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understandings about science and technology: Understandings About Science and Technology"

	S10164C4		"1. The student will compare and contrast the purposes and career opportunities of engineering, technology and science."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S1013CFB		2. The student will provide an example of a need or problem identified by science and solved by engineering or technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S10174D6		"9. The student will describe energy, work and power both conceptually and quantitatively."	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S101851B		"5. The student will recognize that science and technology are influenced by cultural backgrounds and beliefs and by social needs, attitudes,\ values and limitations."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S100E16D		"4. The student will explain how traditions of ethics, peer review, conflict and general consensus influences the conduct of science."	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the nature of scientific ways of thinking and that scientific knowledge changes and accumulates over time.:

NSES	S1020C5F	Applied / 9-12	"An individual's mood and behavior may be modified by substances. The modification may be beneficial or detrimental depending on the motives, type of substance, duration of use, pattern of use, level of influence, and short- and long-term effects. Students should understand that drugs can result in physical dependence and can increase the risk of injury, accidents, and death."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -Personal and community health -Population growth -Natural resources -Environmental quality -Natural and human-induced hazards -Science and technology in local, national, and global challenges: Personal and Community Health"

	S1005D53		2. The student will describe how the functions of individual organ systems are integrated to maintain a homeostatic balance in the body.	"IV. Life Science: G. Human Organism: The student will understand how all organ systems, including the nervous system, interact to maintain homeostasis.:"
	S100702E		"2. The student will know that all matter tends to become more disorganized over time, and that living systems require a continuous input of energy in order to maintain their chemical and physical organizations and prevent death."	IV. Life Science: F. Flow of Matter and Energy: The student will describe and explain the cycling of matter and flow of energy through an ecosystem‚Äôs living and non-living components.:
	S100BCFA		"7. The student will describe the risks and benefits of fossil fuels, renewable sources and nuclear power as sources of usable energy."	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S1016433		"2. The student will explain the influence of temperature, surface area, agitation and catalysts on the rate of a reaction."	II. Physical Science: B. Chemical Reactions: The student will describe chemical reactions and the factors that influence them.:
	S10144D1		"4. The student will identify, predict and investigate the factors that influence the quality of water and how it can be reused, recycled and conserved."	"III. Earth and Space Science: B. The Water Cycle, Weather and Climate: The student will explain the causes and effects of the Earth‚Äôs atmospheric and hydrologic processes.:"

NSES	S101482D	Applied / 9-12	"Human activities can enhance potential for hazards. Acquisition of resources, urban growth, and waste disposal can accelerate rates of natural change."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -Personal and community health -Population growth -Natural resources -Environmental quality -Natural and human-induced hazards -Science and technology in local, national, and global challenges: Natural and Human-Induced Hazards"

	S101B652		"¬?A finite supply of the resources required for life; and,"	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.: 2. The student will use the principles of natural selection to explain the differential survival of groups of organisms as a consequence of::"
	S101F3F3		¬? The potential for a species to increase its numbers;	"IV. Life Science: E. Biological Populations Change Over Time: The student will understand how biological evolution provides a scientific explanation for the fossil record of ancient life forms, as well as for the striking similarities observed among the diverse species of living organisms.: 2. The student will use the principles of natural selection to explain the differential survival of groups of organisms as a consequence of::"
	S1016433		"2. The student will explain the influence of temperature, surface area, agitation and catalysts on the rate of a reaction."	II. Physical Science: B. Chemical Reactions: The student will describe chemical reactions and the factors that influence them.:
	S1005C9A		"4. The student will predict and analyze how a change in an ecosystem, resulting from natural causes, changes in climate, human activity or introduction of invasive species, can affect both the number of organisms in a population and the biodiversity of species in the ecosystem."	IV. Life Science: C. Interdependence of Life: The student will describe how the environment and interactions between organisms can affect the number of species and the diversity of species in an ecosystem.:

NSES	S1009F28	Applied / 9-12	"Personal choice concerning fitness and health involves multiple factors. Personal goals, peer and social pressures, ethnic and religious beliefs, and understanding of biological consequences can all influence decisions about health practices."	"Science in Personal and Social Perspectives: Content Standard F:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -Personal and community health -Population growth -Natural resources -Environmental quality -Natural and human-induced hazards -Science and technology in local, national, and global challenges: Personal and Community Health"

	S100E16D		"4. The student will explain how traditions of ethics, peer review, conflict and general consensus influences the conduct of science."	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the nature of scientific ways of thinking and that scientific knowledge changes and accumulates over time.:

NSES	S101D6D8	Applied / 9-12	"Scientists have ethical traditions. Scientists value peer review, truthful reporting about methods and outcomes of investigations, and making public the results of work. Violations of such norms do occur, but scientists responsible for such violations are censured by their peers."	"History and Nature of Science: Content Standard G:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop understanding of -Science as a human endeavor -Nature of scientific knowledge -Historical perspectives: Science as a Human Endeavor"

	S100431E	1	5. The student will know that professional scientists and engineers have ethical codes.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S100E16D	1	"4. The student will explain how traditions of ethics, peer review, conflict and general consensus influences the conduct of science."	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the nature of scientific ways of thinking and that scientific knowledge changes and accumulates over time.:
	S10174D6		"9. The student will describe energy, work and power both conceptually and quantitatively."	"II. Physical Science: C. Energy Transformation: The student will understand energy forms, transformations and transfers.:"
	S101BCA2		4. The student will identify possible sources of error and their effects on results.	I. History and Nature of Science: B. Scientific Inquiry: The student will design and conduct a scientific investigation.:
	S1001C57		"6. The student will describe the rock cycle and compare and contrast the processes responsible for the formation of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks."	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"

NSES	S101CE47	Applied / 9-12	"Science and technology are pursued for different purposes. Scientific inquiry is driven by the desire to understand the natural world, and technological design is driven by the need to meet human needs and solve human problems. Technology, by its nature, has a more direct effect on society than science because its purpose is to solve human problems, help humans adapt, and fulfill human aspirations. Technological solutions may create new problems. Science, by its nature, answers questions that may or may not directly influence humans. Sometimes scientific advances challenge people's beliefs and practical explanations concerning various aspects of the world."	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understandings about science and technology: Understandings About Science and Technology"

	S101851B		"5. The student will recognize that science and technology are influenced by cultural backgrounds and beliefs and by social needs, attitudes,\ values and limitations."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S1013CFB	1	2. The student will provide an example of a need or problem identified by science and solved by engineering or technology.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S100DCD5	2	3. The student will provide an example of how technology facilitates new discoveries and the development of scientific knowledge.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S10164C4	3	"1. The student will compare and contrast the purposes and career opportunities of engineering, technology and science."	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S1021FFF		"3. The student will recognize that in order to be valid, scientific knowledge must meet certain criteria including that it: be consistent with experimental, observational and inferential evidence about nature; follow rules of logic and reporting both methods and procedures; and, be falsifiable and open to criticism."	I. History and Nature of Science: A. Scientific World View: The student will understand the nature of scientific ways of thinking and that scientific knowledge changes and accumulates over time.:

NSES	S1012D04	Applied / 9-12	Propose designs and choose between alternative solutions. Students should demonstrate thoughtful planning for a piece of technology or technique. Students should be introduced to the roles of models and simulations in these processes.	"Science and Technology: Content Standard E:As a result of activities in grades 9-12, all students should develop -Abilities of technological design -Understandings about science and technology: Abilities of Technological Design"

	S101C898		6. The student will describe and compare the processes of mitosis and meiosis and their roles in the cell cycle.	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S1012A0E		"3. The student will explain the role of the cell membrane as a highly selective barrier in diffusion, osmosis and active transport."	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S100E91B		4. The student will describe the role of enzymes as catalysts in metabolism and cellular synthesis of new molecules.	"IV. Life Science: A. Cells: The student will comprehend that all living things are composed of cells, and that the life processes in a cell are based on molecular interactions.:"
	S100DCD5		3. The student will provide an example of how technology facilitates new discoveries and the development of scientific knowledge.	I. History and Nature of Science: C. Scientific Enterprise: The student will understand the relationship between science and technology and how both are used.:
	S101F0CC		"3. The student will illustrate how biological processes have played significant roles in determining the character of the atmosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere over time."	"III. Earth and Space Science: A. Earth Structure and Processes: The student will understand that the interactions of the atmosphere, biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and space have resulted in ongoing change of the Earth system over geologic time.:"